docs(core): nx sync (#27825)
nrwl/nx: docs/shared/concepts/sync-generators.md

Reviewer: I think we should also mention somewhere that when running tasks in CI (or non-interactive environments) with the workspace being out of sync, the tasks won't run. In that case, the user won't be prompted, an error will be thrown, and the process will exit with code 1.

That's the default behavior, but users can opt out by running tasks with the `--skip-sync` flag.

# Sync Generators

> In Nx 19.7, you can use sync generators to update code before a task is run or before code is sent to CI. Sync generators are designed to perform maintenance work that is required for a particular task or for CI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Nx 19.7, you can use sync generators to keep applicable files in sync with your project graph. These can be for global configuration files or scripts, or at the task level to ensure to that project level configuration files are in sync before a task is run.
```

> In Nx 19.7, you can use sync generators to keep applicable files in sync with your project graph. These can be for global configuration files or scripts, or at the task level to ensure to that project level configuration files are in sync before a task is run.

Reviewer: I'm unsure if we're targeting 19.7 as the version for the stable release. There are still some PRs that need to land before that. @FrozenPandaz can confirm here.

> In Nx 19.7, you can use sync generators to keep applicable files in sync with your project graph. These can be for global configuration files or scripts, or at the task level to ensure to that project level configuration files are in sync before a task is run.

Reviewer: A couple of clarifications here:

- Sync generators "can" keep files in sync with the project graph, but they are not limited to that. They can do anything and are not restricted to using the project graph as the source of truth.
- Similarly, sync generators "can" update configuration files but are not restricted to that type of files. They could also add/update/delete any file.

The example below about formatting files is a clear example of the above, where the project graph is not the source of truth and any file could be formatted.

Sync Generator Examples:

> - Ensure code is formatted in a specific way before CI is run

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is an applicable example, we have `nx format` and making that pluggable would be the preferred way to achieve this IMO (because we have internal utils like `formatFiles` which are coupled to format and won't take sync generators into account in any way)

- Update a custom CI script with binning strategies based on the current project graph
- Update TypeScript config files with project references based on the current project graph

## Task Sync Generators

> Sync generators can be associated with a particular task. Nx will ensure that the sync generator is run before the task is executed. This is similar to the `dependsOn` property, but for generators instead of task dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sync generators can be associated with a particular task. Nx will ensure that the sync generator is run before the task is executed (unless `sync.applyChanges` is set to `false` in `nx.json`). This is similar to the `dependsOn` property, but for generators instead of task dependencies.
```

> Sync generators can be associated with a particular task. Nx will ensure that the sync generator is run before the task is executed (unless `sync.applyChanges` is set to `false` in `nx.json`). This is similar to the `dependsOn` property, but for generators instead of task dependencies.

Reviewer: When `sync.applyChanges` is set to `false`, sync generators are still run before running tasks, but the user isn't prompted, and the changes aren't applied.

Note that this is only true when running in interactive environments. When running in CI or in a non-interactive environment, if the workspace is out of sync, an error will be logged, and the process will exit with code 1.

The `sync.applyChanges` allows you to set the default answer to the prompt that asks you whether you want to apply the changes. It doesn't allow you to opt-out of running the sync generators. It only allows you to opt-out of applying the identified changes needed to be made to sync the workspace.

To skip running sync generators when running tasks, you can run tasks with the `--skip-sync` flag or add specific sync generators to the `sync.disabledTaskSyncGenerators` array in `nx.json`.

To [register a generator](/extending-nx/recipes/register-sync-generator) as a sync generator for a particular task, add the generator to the `syncGenerators` property of the task configuration.

## Global Sync Generators

Global sync generators are not associated with a particular task and are executed only when the `nx sync` or `nx sync:check` command is explicitly run. They are [registered](/extending-nx/recipes/register-sync-generator) in the `nx.json` file with the `sync.globalGenerators` property.

> ## Use the Project Graph in a Sync Generator

Reviewer 2: This section doesn't show you how to use the project graph in a sync generator?

Author: Correct.  I updated the title to better describe what this section is about.  How to use the project graph should go in the Create a Sync Generator recipe, not in the concept page.

Nx processes the file system in order to [create the project graph](/features/explore-graph) which is used run tasks in the correct order and determine project dependencies. Sync generators allow you to also go the other direction and use the project graph to update the file system.

{% side-by-side %}

```{% fileName="File System" %}
└─ myorg
   ├─ apps
   │  ├─ app1
   │  └─ app1
   ├─ libs
   │  └─ lib
   ├─ nx.json
   └─ package.json
```

{% graph title="Project Graph" height="200px" type="project" jsonFile="shared/mental-model/three-projects.json" %}
{% /graph %}
{% /side-by-side %}

## Example Usage

> When Nx detects that the repository is out of sync, the user will be asked if sync generators should be run. To skip this prompt, set the `sync.applyChanges` property in `nx.json` to either `true` or `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Nx detects that the repository is out of sync, the user will be asked if the identified changes by the sync generators registered in the tasks should be applied. To skip this prompt, set the `sync.applyChanges` property in `nx.json` to either `true` or `false`.
```

> Task sync generators are executed whenever their task is run, but global sync generators need to be triggered manually with `nx sync`. We recommend running `nx sync` in a pre-commit or pre-push Git hook to ensure that all committed code is in sync. Also, add `nx sync:check` to the beginning of your CI scripts so that CI can fail quickly if the code is out of sync.

Reviewer 2: I would switch up the emphasis here and say we _strongly_ recommend `nx sync:check` in CI. The git hooks are optional and not as important because folks can easily skip them
